Announcements

0. Exam is TONIGHT 6-8pm in Churchill 103 for your section.

1. Come about 10-15 minutes early to the exam. Exam closes right at 8pm (DAS is the exception)
   Bring your NU ID card to the exam. You will need a PIN and we need to verify your identity.
   I will provide BLUE scrap paper for the exam (thank the trees for their service) but Churchill
   desks are a little cramped, so mileage may vary.

2. No TA office hours Thursday or Friday.
    - Thursday they are proctoring.
    - Friday they are grading. (Thank them for their sacrifice)

3. I have office hours Friday 1-3pm. Meserve 335.


Topics
- Keyboard events
- Testing
- Practicing with Turtles














Problem: I have classes A and B. I wish A could react to events from B.

Solution: Observer Pattern

1. Let A be called the Observer, B called the Subject.

2. Define an interface of Actions that detail all relevant events from B.

3. To your Subject, add a method to subscribe to the Subject.

    public void subscribe(Actions observer) {...}

4. To your Subject, any time the Subject must notify the Observer a relevant event occured,
    call the related method from the Actions interface on the observer.

5. To your Observer, implement the Actions interface. The implementation of those methods
    are the reactions to the event.

6. Finally, SOMEWEHRE in your code, have the Observer subscribe to the Subject.



























class YoutubeChannel {

    private List<VideoNotification> subs;

    public Video getVideoForId(String id) {

    }

    public void publishNewVideo(Video vid) {
        // code for publishing a video
        ...
        for(VideoNotification sub : subs) {
            sub.newVideoAvail("Sup gang.", this, id); //an event occured
        }
    }

    public void subscribe(VideoNotification sub) {
        subs.add(sub);
    }

}




Problem : I have two classes A and B. I want A to react to events given by B.

Solution: Observer Design Pattern

1. Call A the Observer and B the Subject.

2. Define an Actions interface where each behavior is an event produced by B.

3. In the Subject, define a method to add an Observer to the Subject.

    e.g. public void subscribe(Actions observer) { ... }

4. In the Subject (or helper classes of the Subject), call the methods of the Actions interface
    to indicate the event has occurred.

5. Have the Observer implement the Actions interface. In each method, implement the reaction
    to the corresponding event indicated by the method.

6. SOMEWHERE in your code, have the Observer added to the Subject.

    e.g. subject.subscribe(observer);













































